for over 35 years the luthiers of
william harris lee and company have
crafted many of today's finest
contemporary stringed instruments one of
our most esteemed makers gary garavaglia
has been with the shop since it's very
beginning in this short clip gary is
making the very first carvings of the
new cello what you see them working with
here is a form the basic framework
around which an instrument is
constructed every time the luthier
creates a new model a form has to first
be constructed is the form that
generates the fundamental shape and
measurements of the instrument the form
contains six notches into which the
various corner and end blocks have been
lightly glued it is onto these blocks
that both sides or ribs of the
instrument are glued the blocks then
must first be shaped so that they
perfectly match the kurds of the
finished ribs the tool that you see gary
using to shape the corner blocks is
known as a cello block gouge as the name
implies it is specifically made for the
shaping of cello blocks as you might
expect there is a smaller version known
as a violin block couch and experienced
luthier like Gary garavaglia will have a
very extensive and quite expensive
collection of tools many of them very
specialized it is a fact that today's
luthiers use very much the same tools as
those that were used by violin makers of
past centuries keeping them sharp is an
art unto itself and one of the first
tasks an apprentice maker must master is
that of sharpening his tools once the
blocks are shaped then the ribs must be
perfectly formed so they can be glued to
the blocks the ribs of a cello consists
of six very thin pieces of maple you may
have noticed writing on the form below
the area where gary was carving the
corner block these are measurements that
indicate the length of the rib material
for the lower middle and upper bounds
this will be the same for every cello
that is made using this form
the ribs are shaped using moisture and
heat the tools used are a bending iron
and the bending strap the bending iron
in this case a cello bending iron is a
somewhat egg-shaped solid piece of metal
that has curves that are the correct
size and shape to match the curves of
the cello ribs the strap consists of a
very thin sheet of metal aluminum brass
or stainless steel and wooden handles
attached to both ends as you can see in
this video the strap is used to bend the
wood around the hot iron string
instruments are glued together using
hide glue I blew it is an adhesive made
out of the connective tissues bones and
hides and animals mainly cattle that
have gone to the slaughterhouse the
crucial characteristic of high glue for
instrument making is its reversibility
heat and moisture will loosen the glue
so that the instrument can be
disassembled when repairs need to be
performed Terry garavaglia is one of the
world's great cello makers his
instruments feature were warm and
complex tonal quality with easy response
an outstanding projection we invite you
to stop by anytime to audition one of
these great instruments